# 102.2 Install a boot manager .

1. What is the default location for the GRUB 2 configuration file?
/boot/grub/grub.cfg
2. What are the steps needed to change the settings for GRUB 2?
Make your changes to the file /etc/default/grub, then update the configuration with
update-grub.
3. Into which file should custom GRUB 2 menu entries be added?
/etc/grub.d/40_custom
4. Where are the menu entries for GRUB Legacy stored?
/boot/grub/menu.lst
5. From a GRUB 2 or GRUB Legacy menu, how can you enter the GRUB Shell?
Press c in the menu screen.
1. Imagine a user configuring GRUB Legacy to boot from the second partition of the first disk. He
writes the following custom menu entry:
title My Linux Distro
root (hd0,2)
kernel /vmlinuz root=/dev/hda1
initrd /initrd.img
However, the system will not boot. What is wrong?
The boot partition is wrong. Remember that, unlike GRUB 2, GRUB Legacy counts the partitions
from zero. So, the correct command for the second partition of the first disk should be root
(hd0,1).
2. Imagine you have a disk identified as /dev/sda with multiple partitions. Which command can
be used to find out which is the boot partition on a system?
Use fdisk -l /dev/sda. The boot partition will be marked with an asterisk (*) in the listing.
3. Which command can be used to find out the UUID of a partition?
Use ls -la /dev/disk/by-uuid/ and look for the UUID that points to the partition.
4. Consider the following entry for GRUB 2
menuentry "Default OS" {
  set root=(hd0,1)
  linux /vmlinuz root=/dev/sda1 ro quiet splash
  initrd /initrd.img
}
Change it so the system will boot from a disk with the UUID 5dda0af3-c995-481a-a6f3-
46dcd3b6998d
You will need to change the set root statement. Instead of specifying a disk and partition, tell
grub to search for the partition with the desired UUID.
menuentry "Default OS" {
  search --set=root --fs-uuid 5dda0af3-c995-481a-a6f3-46dcd3b6998d
  linux /vmlinuz root=/dev/sda1 ro quiet splash
  initrd /initrd.img
}
5. How can you set GRUB 2 to wait for 10 seconds before booting the default menu entry?
Add the parameter GRUB_TIMEOUT=10 to /etc/default/grub.
6. From a GRUB Legacy shell, what are the commands to install GRUB to the first partition of the
second disk?
grub> root (hd1,0)
grub> setup (hd1)