# 103.1 Work on the command line

1. Use the man system to determine how to tell apropos to output a brief command so that it
outputs only a brief usage message and then exits.
Run man apropos and scroll down through the “Options” section until you get to the --usage
paragraph.
2. Use the man system to determine which copyright license is assigned to the grep command.
Run man grep and scroll down to the “Copyright” section of the document. Note that the
program uses a copyright from the Free Software Foundation.
1. Identify the hardware architecture and Linux kernel version being used on your computer in
an easy-to-read output format.
Run man uname, read through the “Description” section, and identify the command arguments
that will display only the exact results you want. Note how -v will give you the kernel version
and -i will provide hardware platform.
$ man uname
$ uname -v
$ uname -i
2. Print out the last twenty lines of the dynamic history database and the .bash_history file to
compare them.
$ history 20
$ tail -n 20 .bash_history
3. Use the apropos tool to identify the man page where you will find the command you will need
to display the size of an attached physical block device in bytes rather than megabytes or
gigabytes.
One way, would be to run apropos with the string block, read through the results, note that
lsblk lists block devices (and would, therefore, be the most likely tool for our needs), run man
lsblk, scroll through the “Description” section and note that -b will display a device size in
bytes. Finally, run lsblk -b to see what comes out.
$ apropos block
$ man lsblk
$ lsblk -b

1. Use the export command to add a new directory to your path (this will not survive a reboot).
You can temporarily add a new directory (perhaps one called myfiles that lives in your home
directory) to your path using export PATH="/home/yourname/myfiles:$PATH". Create a
simple script in the myfiles/ directory, make it executable, and try to run it from a different
directory. These commands assume you’re in your home directory which contains a directory
called myfiles.
$ touch myfiles/myscript.sh
$ echo '#!/bin/bash' >> myfiles/myscript.sh
$ echo 'echo Hello' >> myfiles/myscript.sh
$ chmod +x myfiles/myscript.sh
$ myscript.sh
Hello
2. Use the unset command to delete the PATH variable. Try running a command (like sudo cat
/etc/shadow) using sudo. What happened? Why? (Exiting your shell will return you to your
original state.)
Typing unset PATH will erase the current path settings. Trying to invoke a binary without its
absolute address will fail. For that reason, trying to run a command using sudo (which itself is a
binary program located in /usr/bin/sudo) will fail — unless you specify the absolute location,
as in: /usr/bin/sudo /bin/cat /etc/shadow. You can reset your PATH using export or by
simply exiting from the shell.
1. Search the internet to find and explore the complete list of special characters.
Here is a list: & ; | * ? " ' [ ] ( ) $ < > { } # / \ ! ~.
2. Try running commands using strings made up of special characters and using various methods
to escape them. Are there differences between the way those methods behave?
Escaping using " characters will preserve the special values of the dollar sign, a backtick, and
the backslash. Escaping using a ' character, on the other hand, will render all characters as
literal.
$ echo "$mynewvar"
goodbye
$ echo '$mynewvar'
$mynewvar