# 104.6 Create and change hard and symbolic links

1. What is the parameter for chmod in symbolic mode to enable the sticky bit on a directory?
The symbol for the sticky bit in symbolic mode is t. Since we want to enable (add) this
permission to the directory, the parameter should be +t.
2. Imagine there is a file named document.txt in the directory /home/carol/Documents. What
is the command to create a symbolic link to it named text.txt on the current directory?
ln -s is the command to create a symbolic link. Since you should specify the full path to the
file you are linking to, the command is:
$ ln -s /home/carol/Documents/document.txt text.txt
3. Explain the difference between a hard link to a file and a copy of this file.
A hard link is just another name for a file. Even though it looks like a duplicate of the original
file, for all purposes both the link and the original are the same, as they point to the same data
on disk. Changes made on the contents of the link will be reflected on the original, and viceversa.
A copy is a completely independent entity, occupying a different place on disk. Changes
to the copy will not be reflected on the original, and vice-versa.

1. Imagine that inside a directory you create a file called recipes.txt. Inside this directory, you
will also create a hard link to this file, called receitas.txt, and a symbolic (or soft) link to this
called rezepte.txt.
$ touch recipes.txt
$ ln recipes.txt receitas.txt
$ ln -s receitas.txt rezepte.txt
The contents of the directory should be like so:
$ ls -lhi
total 160K
5388833 -rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 77K jun 17 17:25 receitas.txt
5388833 -rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 0K jun 17 17:25 recipes.txt
5388837 lrwxrwxrwx 1 carol carol 12 jun 17 17:25 rezepte.txt -> receitas.txt
Remember that, as a hard link, receitas.txt points to the same inode that recipes.txt.
What would happen to the soft link rezepte.txt if the file receitas.txt is deleted? Why?
The soft link rezepte.txt would stop working. This is because soft links point to names, not
inodes, and the name receitas.txt no longer exists, even if the data is still on the disk under
the name recipes.txt.
2. Imagine you have a flash drive plugged into your system, and mounted on
/media/youruser/FlashA. You want to create a link called schematics.pdf in your home
directory, pointing to the file esquema.pdf on the root of the flash drive. So, you type the
command:
$ ln /media/youruser/FlashA/esquema.pdf ~/schematics.pdf
What would happen? Why?
The command would fail. The error message would be Invalid cross-device link, and it
makes the reason clear: hard links cannot point to a target in a different partition or device.
The only way to create a link like this is to use a symbolic or soft link, adding the -s parameter
to ln.
3. Consider the following output of ls -lah:
4. $ ls -lah
total 3,1M
drwxr-xr-x 2 carol carol 4,0K jun 17 17:27 .
drwxr-xr-x 5 carol carol 4,0K jun 17 17:29 ..
-rw-rw-r-- 1 carol carol 2,8M jun 17 15:45 compressed.zip
-rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 77K jun 17 17:25 document.txt
-rw-rw-r-- 1 carol carol 216K jun 17 17:25 image.png
-rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 77K jun 17 17:25 text.txt
◦ How many links point to the file document.txt?
Every file starts with a link count of 1. Since the link count for the file is 4, there are three
links pointing to that file.
◦ Are they soft or hard links?
They are hard links, since soft links do not increase the link count of a file.
◦ Which parameter should you pass to ls to see which inode each file occupies?
The parameter is -i. The inode will be shown as the first column in the output of ls, like
below:
$ ls -lahi
total 3,1M
5388773 drwxr-xr-x 2 carol carol 4,0K jun 17 17:27 .
5245554 drwxr-xr-x 5 carol carol 4,0K jun 17 17:29 ..
5388840 -rw-rw-r-- 1 carol carol 2,8M jun 17 15:45 compressed.zip
5388833 -rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 77K jun 17 17:25 document.txt
5388837 -rw-rw-r-- 1 carol carol 216K jun 17 17:25 image.png
5388833 -rw-r--r-- 4 carol carol 77K jun 17 17:25 text.txt
4. Imagine you have in your ~/Documents directory a file named clients.txt containing some
client names, and a directory named somedir. Inside this there is a different file also named
clients.txt with different names. To replicate this structure, use the following commands.
$ cd ~/Documents
$ echo "John, Michael, Bob" > clients.txt
$ mkdir somedir
$ echo "Bill, Luke, Karl" > somedir/clients.txt
You then create a link inside somedir named partners.txt pointing to this file, with the
commands:
$ cd somedir/
$ ln -s clients.txt partners.txt
So, the directory structure is:
Documents
|-- clients.txt
`-- somedir
|-- clients.txt
`-- partners.txt -> clients.txt
Now, you move partners.txt from somedir to ~/Documents, and list its contents.
$ cd ~/Documents/
$ mv somedir/partners.txt .
$ less partners.txt
Will the link still work? If so, which file will have its contents listed? Why?
This is a “tricky” one, but the link will work, and the file listed will be the one in ~/Documents,
containing the names John, Michael, Bob.
Remember that since you did not specify the full path to the target clients.txt when creating
the soft link partners.txt, the target location will be interpreted as being relative to the
location of the link, which in this case is the current directory.
When the link was moved from ~/Documents/somedir to ~/Documents, it should stop
working, since the target was no longer in the same directory as the link. However, it just so
happens that there is a file named clients.txt on ~/Documents, so the link will point to this
file, instead of the original target inside ~/somedir.
To avoid this, always specify the full path to the target when creating a symbolic link.
5. Consider the following files:
-rw-r--r-- 1 carol carol 19 Jun 24 11:12 clients.txt
lrwxrwxrwx 1 carol carol 11 Jun 24 11:13 partners.txt -> clients.txt
What are the access permissions for partners.txt? Why?
The access permissions for partners.txt are rw-r—r--, as links always inherit the same
access permissions as the target.