# 104.1 Create partitions and filesystems

1. Which partitioning scheme should be used to partition a 3 TB hard disk into three 1 GB
partitions? Why?
GPT, as MBR supports at most 2 TB hard disks.
2. On gdisk, how can we find out how much space is available on the disk?
Use p (print). The total free space will be shown as the last line of information before the
partition table itself.
3. What would be the command to create an ext3 filesystem, checking for bad blocks before, with
the label MyDisk and a random UUID, on the device /dev/sdc1?
The command would be mkfs.ext3 -c -L MyDisk -U random /dev/sdc1. Alternatively,
mke2fs -t ext3 can also be used instead of mkfs.ext3
4. Using parted, what is the command to create a 300 MB ext4 partition, starting at 500 MB on the
disk?
Use mkpart primary ext4 500m 800m. Remember that you will have to create the filesystem
using mkfs.ext4, as parted does not do this.
5. Imagine you have 2 partitions, one on /dev/sda1 and the other on /dev/sdb1, both 20 GB in
size. How can you use them on a single Btrfs filesystem, in such a way that the contents of one
partition will be automatically mirrored on the other, like on a RAID1 setup? How big will the
filesystem be?
Use mkfs.btrfs /dev/sda1 /dev/sdb1 -m raid1. The resulting filesystem will be 20 GB in
size, as one partition acts simply as a mirror of the other.
1. Consider a 2 GB disk with an MBR partition table and the following layout:
Disk /dev/sdb: 1.9 GiB, 1998631936 bytes, 3903578 sectors
Disk model: DataTraveler 2.0
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0x31a83a48
Device Boot Start End Sectors Size Id Type
/dev/sdb1 2048 1050623 1048576 512M 83 Linux
/dev/sdb3 2099200 3147775 1048576 512M 83 Linux
Can you create a 600 MB partition on it? Why?
You cannot, because there is not enough contiguous space. The first clue that something is “off”
is the list of devices: you have /dev/sdb1 and /dev/sdb3, but no /dev/sdb2. So, something is
missing.
Then, you need to look where a partition ends and the other one begins. Partition one ends at
sector 1050623, and partition 2 starts at 2099200. That’s a “gap” of 1048577 sectors. At 512
bytes per sector, that’s 536.871.424 bytes. If you divide it by 1024 you get 524.288 Kilobytes.
Divide by 1024 again and you get… 512 MB. This is the size of the “gap”.
If the disk it 2 GB, then we wave at most another 512 MB after partition 3. Even if we have in
total around 1 GB unallocated, the biggest contiguous block is 512 MB. So, there is no space for
a 600 MB partition.
2. On a disk at /dev/sdc, we have a first partition of 1 GB, containing an ext4 filesystem with 241
MB of files. Using parted, how can you shrink it so it has just enough space for the files?
This is a multi-part operation. First you have to shrink the filesystem using resize2fs. Instead
of specifying the new size directly, you can use the -M parameter so it is just “big enough”. So:
resize2fs -M /dev/sdc1.
Then, you resize the partition itself with parted using resizepart. Since it is the first partition,
we can assume that it starts at zero and ends at 241 MB. So the command is resizepart 1
241M.
3. Imagine you have a disk at /dev/sdb, and you want to create a 1 GB partition at the start of it.
So, using parted, you create the partition with mkpart primary linux-swap 0 1024M. Then,
you enable swap on this partition with swapon /dev/sdb1, but get the following error
message:
swapon: /dev/sdb1: read swap header failed
What went wrong?
You created a partition of the correct type (linux-swap), but remember that mkpart does not
create a filesystem. You forgot to set-up the partition as a swap space first with mkswap before
using it.
4. During the course of this lesson, you were trying out some commands in parted but, by
mistake, deleted the 3rd partition on your hard disk. You know that it came after a 250 MB EFI
partition and a 4 GB swap partition, and was 10 GB in size. Which parted command can you
use to recover it?
Don’t panic, you have all the information you need to recover the partition, just use rescue
and do the math. You had 250 MB + 4.096 MB (4*1024) before it, so the start point should be
around 4346 MB. Plus 10.240 MB (10*1024) in size, it should end at 14.586 MB. So, rescue
4346m 14586m should to the trick. You might need to give some “slack” to rescue, starting a
little early and ending a little late, depending on the geometry of your disk.
5. Imagine you have a 4 GB unused partition on /dev/sda3. Using fdisk, what would be the
sequence of operations to turn it into an active swap partition?
First, change the partition type to “Linux Swap” (82), write your changes to disk and quit. Then,
use mkswap to set up the partition as a swap area. Then, use swapon to enable it.